Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are going to be talking
about the Salem Witch Trials.
It’s a story of suspicion, the devil,
witchcraft–alleged witchcraft, I
should add–mass hysteria, hints
of psychedelic drugs, and justice.
OK then, let’s step into
the icy, unsettling world
of the Salem Witch Trials.
The winter of 1692 was
particularly cold in Massachusetts.
The temperature rarely got above
freezing point, and many of the
ponds and rivers had been frozen
over since late the previous year.
In the small village of Salem,
the 500 or so Puritan settlers did
everything they could to stay warm.
Church was, of course,
a regular occurrence.
This was a highly religious community.
And what these god-fearing men and women
feared the most was, naturally, the devil.
In Salem Village, the devil
wasn’t just a story whispered
to scare children; he was real.
To the 500 or so Puritans huddled
in their icy wooden homes, he was an
ever-present enemy, lurking in the
shadows, waiting to snatch their souls.
But why were they so afraid?
Why did this small, God-fearing community
see the devil behind every misfortune?
Well, these settlers weren’t just a
random collection of English people,
they were Puritans, a group so strict,
so devoted, that they’d crossed
an ocean to build a ‘pure’ life.
Back in England, their parents or
grandparents had watched the Protestant
Reformation unfold, and they believed
the Church of England, the Protestant
church, hadn’t gone far enough to
strip away Catholic influences.
So they sailed across the Atlantic,
dreaming of a holy community,
a shining “city upon a hill”.
But that dream came with a catch:
if they were God’s chosen people,
and of course, they fervently
believed that they were, the devil
would surely try to destroy them.
And in early 1692, life gave
them plenty of reasons to feel
that the devil was edging closer.
The winter was brutal, crops
had failed, smallpox had swept
through, and Indian raids from the
north had left families grieving.
Every creak of the floorboards,
every howl of the wind through the
frozen trees, felt like a sign.
The Puritans believed the devil
wasn’t some distant figure, someone
you might meet in hell if you didn’t
live a god-fearing life; he was here,
or rather, his secret servants were.
These servants were witches, people,
almost exclusively women, who had made a
pact with Satan, a deal with the devil.
And they weren’t random strangers;
they were neighbours, friends, even
family, who were working with the devil.
His tricks were clever: he could
send ‘spectres,’ invisible spirits,
to pinch or choke you in the night.
He could turn your cow’s milk sour or
make your children fall ill and die.
Every Sunday, Reverend Samuel Parris, the
village minister, would stand in front of
his congregation and preach exactly this.
Beware the devil; he has evil
and cunning ways, and he is
sending witches to test you.
Perhaps it all sounded theoretical, but
in January of 1692, he noticed something
unusual happening in his own house.
His daughter, Betty, and her cousin
Abigail, started behaving strangely.
They were only 9 and 11 years
old, but suddenly, they weren’t
acting like children anymore.
They twitched and shook, cried
out in pain, and complained
of being pinched or bitten.
But there was nothing there.
It wasn’t mice, it wasn’t
some pest, or bed bugs.
They seemed to be being attacked
by some invisible force.
At first, it might have
seemed like a sickness.
After all, the winter had been
harsh, and disease wasn’t uncommon.
But when a local doctor examined
them and found no clear cause,
he gave an altogether different
explanation: witchcraft.
To the Puritans, this made perfect sense.
If the devil was real, and his
witches were among them, then
these girls were under attack.
Word spread quickly through the village.
Salem was small, only about 500 people, so
news travelled fast, from house to house,
whispered over fences and church pews.
Soon, other girls in the village
started showing the same signs.
Ann Putnam Jr., a 12-year-old from
a powerful family, and Mercy Lewis,
a 17-year-old servant, joined
Betty and Abigail in their fits.
They screamed about invisible tormentors,
pointed fingers, and named names.
The first to be accused were the
kind of people you might expect
in a suspicious little village:
outcasts, people on the edges.
There was Sarah Good, a beggar who
smoked a pipe and muttered under her
breath when anyone refused her charity.
Then Sarah Osborne, an older woman
who’d shocked the village by marrying
her servant and committing the most
scandalous crime of all: skipping church.
And finally, Tituba, a black slave woman
who worked in Reverend Parris’s own home.
Now, not much is known about Tituba.
It’s thought she might have come from
the Caribbean, perhaps Haiti, and if so,
she may well have told the girls stories
about Vodoo, spirits and fortune-telling.
These might have sounded weird and
fascinating, but with the accusation
of witchcraft, to her Puritan master,
they sounded like the work of the devil.
Under pressure, Tituba confessed.
She was questioned for days, beaten, and
likely told that confessing could save her
life, while denying it would mean death.
In a village gripped by fear,
she had little choice but to give
them what they wanted: a story.
She described visions of black
dogs, red cats, and witches flying
through the air, details that
matched Puritan fears perfectly.
She said she’d met the devil, that he’d
asked her to serve him, and that she’d
seen other witches in Salem signing
his book, a sort of evil guest list.
Her confession wasn’t
just a story; it was fuel.
Suddenly, the village had
proof, or so they thought.
If Tituba was a witch, then
the girls’ fits weren’t
imagination; they were evidence.
And if there were more witches out there,
as Tituba claimed, no one was safe.
Soon, fingers started to
be pointed every which way.
The accusations didn’t
stop with the outcasts.
They spread to people no one expected: a
71-year-old grandmother who went to church
every Sunday and a well-respected farmer.
When a woman named Martha Corey, who was
in her 70s at the time, dared to question
if the girls were telling the truth, she
found herself accused of being a witch.
Her husband, Giles Corey, an 80-year-old
farmer, was another one of the few who
refused to play along, and of course, he
found himself accused of witchcraft too.
He wouldn’t confess or deny the charges,
so the court ordered him to be pressed
under heavy stones, a terrible torture
intended to get him to realise the
error of his ways and corroborate.
For two days, he lay there, saying
only ‘More weight,’ until he died, a
stubborn stand against the madness.
His wife was executed three days later.
In a village of 500, where everyone knew
each other, this had become personal.
Neighbour turned against neighbour, enemy
against enemy, friend against friend.
By spring, the panic had grown
so big that the local magistrates
couldn’t handle it anymore.
A special court was set up in Salem
Town, just a few miles away, to deal
with the growing list of the accused.
And here’s where things got even stranger:
the court didn’t rely on normal evidence,
like witnesses or proof you could touch.
They used ‘spectral evidence’, the
idea that the devil could send a
witch’s spirit to harm someone, even
if her body were somewhere else.
If a girl screamed in court and
said she saw Sarah Good’s spectre
choking her, that was enough.
It didn’t matter if Sarah was standing
right there, clearly not doing anything
other than trying to defend herself.
To the Puritans, the invisible world was
just as real as the frozen ponds outside.
As you might imagine, the courtroom was a
mess: girls fainting, judges pushing for
guilty verdicts, and even a ‘touch test’
where if an accused touched a girl and
her fits stopped, it was proof of guilt.
By summer, the jails were full,
and the gallows were busy.
Nineteen people were hanged that year.
Five more died in prison,
including Sarah Osborne, who was
worn out by illness and chains.
And Giles Corey, of course,
met his end under the stones.
But it couldn’t go on forever.
By late summer, the accusations had become
a form of village retribution, a way to
settle scores with quarrelling neighbours.
If there was a dispute over land or
some feeling of being wronged in the
past, what better way to get your
vengeance than accusing your enemy
of being in bed with the devil?
In fact, it took the accusations
to reach the very top of Puritan
society for the madness to end.
People began pointing fingers at
the wives of important men, like
the wife of Governor William Phips,
who was in charge of Massachusetts.
This was a step too far.
Phips had been away, dealing with
Indian wars up north, but when he
returned in October 1692, he saw the
chaos and shut the special court down.
Or, more cynically, he might have
thought, “I don’t mind people
accusing other people’s wives of
being a witch, but you’re not going
to accuse my wife of witchcraft!”
He banned spectral evidence,
saying it wasn’t reliable.
Of course, it wasn’t reliable;
it was invisible and was one
person’s word against another's.
Without that, most of the cases fell
apart because there was no evidence.
The trials slowed, then stopped.
By early 1693, the jails started to empty.
Tituba, who’d confessed, was sold to a new
owner and disappeared from the records.
The girls, Betty, Abigail, Ann and
Mercy, went quiet, their fits fading
away as the village tried to move on.
Years later, in 1706, Ann Putnam
Jr. stood in church and apologised.
She said she’d been tricked–by
the devil, she claimed–and
hadn’t meant to hurt anyone.
By then, 20 people were dead, and
Salem was a village full of scars.
In the immediate aftermath, there
were movements to try to undo
some of the damage, or at least
acknowledge the sheer insanity of it.
In 1702, the trials
were declared unlawful.
Then, in 1711, the government passed
a law to restore the rights and good
names of many who’d been condemned.
They even paid some money to the
families, a token compensation
payment by way of apology.
It wasn’t much, but it was something.
Still, not everyone was included.
Seven people’s names stayed
on the list of the guilty,
forgotten by that first effort.
It wasn’t until 1957 that
Massachusetts said sorry and tried
to fix it again, clearing more names.
But one person, a woman named Elizabeth
Johnson Jr., was somehow missed out.
She’d been accused and
convicted but not hanged.
She died of natural causes in 1747 at
the ripe old age of 77 but with no living
descendants to fight to clear her name,
legally speaking, she was still a witch.
However, more than 300 years after this
conviction, she found some unlikely
supporters in the form of a particularly
creative teacher called Carrie
LaPierre and her middle school class.
Mrs LaPierre found out about Elizabeth
Johnson Jr and set her eighth-grade
class a project: clear her name.
The class worked tirelessly, collating
records and writing letters, and in
2022, a bill was passed that officially
exonerated Elizabeth Johnson Jr.,
thereby clearing the last convicted
person in the Salem Witch Trials.
Of course, she should never have
been convicted in the first place,
but it was better than nothing, and
Mrs LaPierre definitely deserves
some sort of prize for devising
such an interesting class project.
So, if we are to conclude that
the residents of Salem were not
being challenged by the devil, and
there was not a mass transformation
of the female population into
witches, what was going on?
Well, people have been trying to
figure that out for centuries,
and there are a few theories.
One idea is that it all
came down to a fungus.
Ergot, to be exact.
Ergot grows on rye, a grain the
Puritans used to make bread.
If the weather is wet and warm, like
it might have been in the summer
of 1691, ergot can spread fast.
Now, here’s the strange part.
Ergot contains natural chemicals
that are similar to LSD, the
powerful hallucinogenic drug
that became famous in the 1960s.
LSD causes people to see and
feel things that aren’t real, and
ergot can do something similar.
If someone eats bread made with infected
rye, they might become very sick,
have convulsions, feel like they’re
being pinched or burned, or even
see things that aren’t really there.
In other words, make people do
exactly what the young girls did.
Some historians think this could
explain the strange behaviour,
not witches, just bad bread.
But not everyone agrees.
The symptoms don’t match perfectly,
nor does the timeline, and ergot
poisoning would’ve hit more people,
not just a handful of girls.
Another theory is simpler: mass hysteria.
Salem was a pressure cooker; harsh
winters, failed crops, disease,
and attacks from nearby tribes
had nearly everyone on edge.
Add in their deep fear of the
devil, and it wouldn’t have
taken much to spark panic.
When the girls started twitching
and shouting, the village was
ready to believe the worst.
Fear spread like wildfire, and
soon, people saw witches everywhere
because they expected to.
The girls might have kept it
going, maybe for attention, maybe
out of fear themselves, while
adults fuelled the flames with
old grudges and power struggles.
Then there’s the idea of
plain old jealousy and spite.
Salem was tiny, 500 people, and
everyone knew everyone else’s business.
Sarah Good was poor and
bitter; Sarah Osborne broke the
rules; Tituba was an outsider.
Accusing them could settle
scores or shift blame.
Once it started, it snowballed; people
piled on, afraid of being accused
themselves if they didn’t join in.
So, which is it?
Maybe a bit of all three: some
sickness, a lot of fear, and
plenty of human messiness.
Now, to wrap things up, this
was a weird period indeed.
15 months, more than 200 people accused,
the vast majority of whom were women.
Nineteen people were hanged, one
eighty-year-old man crushed to
death under heavy stones, and
at least five more died in jail.
It was a miscarriage of justice
indeed, and to think, it might
all have come down to bad bread.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on the Salem Witch Trials.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you've learnt something new.
If you enjoyed it, we have
another episode on the history of
witches, it’s episode number 322.
I'll put a link in the show notes
if you'd like to listen to that one.
And we have a bunch of other
“horror”-themed episodes, or
ones about “weird history” too.
Just click on the “horror” or “weird
history” tab if you’re listening on
our website, and I’ll put some links to
all of those in the show notes as well.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.